.. http://processors.wiki.ti.com/index.php/IPC_Resource_customTable

Introduction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The IPC 3.x product introduced support for loading target images which
include a `Linux-defined resource table <http://lwn.net/Articles/489009/>`__.
In IPC 3.00.01, `IPC added the ability <http://git.ti.com/cgit/cgit.cgi/ipc/ipcdev.git/commit/?h=ipc-next&id=44169db6cd6f02193acf7ee97c13f956f599431d>`__
for users to override the default resource table with their own. This
article describes the mechanics involved to do that.

.. note::
  Although the Linux community defined the resource table, the IPC port to
  QNX also uses the same resource table.

.. note::
  This is an expert technique. Most users do not need to modify the
  default resource table.

Config
^^^^^^^^^
To indicate you want to provide your own resource table, you need to set
the ``Resource.customTable`` config parameter ``true``.

::

    /* Override the default resource table with my own */
    var Resource = xdc.useModule('ti.ipc.remoteproc.Resource');
    Resource.customTable = true;

When ``Resource.customtable`` is set to ``true``, IPC will no longer
generate a default table, and the user will be able to supply their own
table using a specially-named C struct,
``ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable``.

C Code
^^^^^^^^^
The user-supplied resource table is a C structure named
``ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable`` that needs to be linked into the
target executable. The platform-specific default resource tables are
provided in IPC's **packages/ti/ip/remoteproc/rsc_table_*.h**, and are
the recommended place to start from.

After finding the default resource table for your platform, you can copy
the entirety of it into your own C file, compile it, and link it into
your executable.

.. note::
  When configuring in a TYPE_TRACE element (a trace buffer) you must
  explicitly declare the symbol as an extern (as below). The trace buffer
  is generated during config, and unfortunately there is no header to
  #include that declares the name of this symbol. Also note the size of
  the trace buffer declared in the resource table must match the size
  you've specified in your .cfg script.

For reference, here is an Vayu compatible resource table derived from
**packages/ti/ipc/remoteproc/rsc_table_vayu_ipu.h**\ ( Disclaimer: This
is a reference design only, and it is subject to enhancements,
improvements and other changes without notifications).

.. code-block:: c

    #include "rsc_types.h"
     
    /* IPU Memory Map */
    #define L4_DRA7XX_BASE          0x4A000000
     
    /* L4_CFG & L4_WKUP */
    #define L4_PERIPHERAL_L4CFG     (L4_DRA7XX_BASE)
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4CFG    0x6A000000
     
    #define L4_PERIPHERAL_L4PER1    0x48000000
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER1   0x68000000
     
    #define L4_PERIPHERAL_L4PER2    0x48400000
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER2   0x68400000
     
    #define L4_PERIPHERAL_L4PER3    0x48800000
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER3   0x68800000
     
    #define L4_PERIPHERAL_L4EMU     0x54000000
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4EMU    0x74000000
     
    #define L3_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS     0x4B200000
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS    0x6B200000
     
    #define L3_PERIPHERAL_DMM       0x4E000000
    #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_DMM      0x6E000000
     
    #define L3_IVAHD_CONFIG         0x5A000000
    #define IPU_IVAHD_CONFIG        0x7A000000
     
    #define L3_IVAHD_SL2            0x5B000000
    #define IPU_IVAHD_SL2           0x7B000000
     
    #define L3_TILER_MODE_0_1       0x60000000
    #define IPU_TILER_MODE_0_1      0xA0000000
     
    #define L3_TILER_MODE_2         0x70000000
    #define IPU_TILER_MODE_2        0xB0000000
     
    #define L3_TILER_MODE_3         0x78000000
    #define IPU_TILER_MODE_3        0xB8000000
     
    #define L3_OCMC_RAM       0x40300000
    #define IPU_OCMC_RAM      0x60300000
     
    #define L3_EMIF_SDRAM     0xA0000000
    #define IPU_EMIF_SDRAM        0x10000000
     
    #define IPU_MEM_TEXT            0x0
    #define IPU_MEM_DATA            0x80000000
     
    #define IPU_MEM_IOBUFS          0x90000000
     
    #define IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA        0x9F000000
    #define IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING       0x60000000
    #define IPU_MEM_RPMSG_VRING0    0x60000000
    #define IPU_MEM_RPMSG_VRING1    0x60004000
    #define IPU_MEM_VRING_BUFS0     0x60040000
    #define IPU_MEM_VRING_BUFS1     0x60080000
     
    #define IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING_SIZE  SZ_1M
    #define IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA_SIZE   SZ_1M
     
    #if defined(VAYU_IPU_1)
    #define IPU_MEM_TEXT_SIZE       (SZ_1M)
    #elif defined(VAYU_IPU_2)
    #define IPU_MEM_TEXT_SIZE       (SZ_1M * 6)
    #endif
     
    #if defined(VAYU_IPU_1)
    #define IPU_MEM_DATA_SIZE       (SZ_1M * 5)
    #elif defined(VAYU_IPU_2)
    #define IPU_MEM_DATA_SIZE       (SZ_1M * 48)
    #endif
     
    #define IPU_MEM_IOBUFS_SIZE     (SZ_1M * 90)
     
    /*
     * Assign fixed RAM addresses to facilitate a fixed MMU table.
     * PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING & PHYS_MEM_IPC_DATA MUST be together.
     */
    /* See CMA BASE addresses in Linux side: arch/arm/mach-omap2/remoteproc.c */
    #if defined(VAYU_IPU_1)
    #define PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING      0x9D000000
    #elif defined (VAYU_IPU_2)
    #define PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING      0x95800000
    #endif
     
    #define PHYS_MEM_IOBUFS         0xBA300000
     
    /*
     * Sizes of the virtqueues (expressed in number of buffers supported,
     * and must be power of 2)
     */
    #define IPU_RPMSG_VQ0_SIZE      256
    #define IPU_RPMSG_VQ1_SIZE      256
     
    /* flip up bits whose indices represent features we support */
    #define RPMSG_IPU_C0_FEATURES   1
     
    struct my_resource_table {
        struct resource_table base;
     
        UInt32 offset[21];  /* Should match 'num' in actual definition */
     
        /* rpmsg vdev entry */
        struct fw_rsc_vdev rpmsg_vdev;
        struct fw_rsc_vdev_vring rpmsg_vring0;
        struct fw_rsc_vdev_vring rpmsg_vring1;
     
        /* text carveout entry */
        struct fw_rsc_carveout text_cout;
     
        /* data carveout entry */
        struct fw_rsc_carveout data_cout;
     
        /* ipcdata carveout entry */
        struct fw_rsc_carveout ipcdata_cout;
     
        /* trace entry */
        struct fw_rsc_trace trace;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem0;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem1;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem2;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem3;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem4;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem5;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem6;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem7;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem8;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem9;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem10;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem11;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem12;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem13;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem14;
     
        /* devmem entry */
        struct fw_rsc_devmem devmem15;
    };
    extern char ti_trace_SysMin_Module_State_0_outbuf__A;
    #define TRACEBUFADDR (UInt32)&ti_trace_SysMin_Module_State_0_outbuf__A
     
    #pragma DATA_SECTION(ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable, ".resource_table")
    #pragma DATA_ALIGN(ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable, 4096)
     
    struct my_resource_table ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable = {
        1,      /* we're the first version that implements this */
        21,     /* number of entries in the table */
        0, 0,   /* reserved, must be zero */
        /* offsets to entries */
        {
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, rpmsg_vdev),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, text_cout),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, data_cout),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, ipcdata_cout),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, trace),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem0),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem1),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem2),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem3),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem4),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem5),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem6),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem7),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem8),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem9),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem10),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem11),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem12),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem13),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem14),
            offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmem15),
        },
     
        /* rpmsg vdev entry */
        {
            TYPE_VDEV, VIRTIO_ID_RPMSG, 0,
            RPMSG_IPU_C0_FEATURES, 0, 0, 0, 2, { 0, 0 },
            /* no config data */
        },
        /* the two vrings */
        { IPU_MEM_RPMSG_VRING0, 4096, IPU_RPMSG_VQ0_SIZE, 1, 0 },
        { IPU_MEM_RPMSG_VRING1, 4096, IPU_RPMSG_VQ1_SIZE, 2, 0 },
     
        {
            TYPE_CARVEOUT,
            IPU_MEM_TEXT, 0,
            IPU_MEM_TEXT_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_TEXT",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_CARVEOUT,
            IPU_MEM_DATA, 0,
            IPU_MEM_DATA_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_DATA",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_CARVEOUT,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA, 0,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_TRACE, TRACEBUFADDR, 0x8000, 0, "trace:sysm3",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING, PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_MEM_IOBUFS, PHYS_MEM_IOBUFS,
            IPU_MEM_IOBUFS_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_IOBUFS",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_TILER_MODE_0_1, L3_TILER_MODE_0_1,
            SZ_256M, 0, 0, "IPU_TILER_MODE_0_1",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_TILER_MODE_2, L3_TILER_MODE_2,
            SZ_128M, 0, 0, "IPU_TILER_MODE_2",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_TILER_MODE_3, L3_TILER_MODE_3,
            SZ_128M, 0, 0, "IPU_TILER_MODE_3",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4CFG, L4_PERIPHERAL_L4CFG,
            SZ_16M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4CFG",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER1, L4_PERIPHERAL_L4PER1,
            SZ_2M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER1",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER2, L4_PERIPHERAL_L4PER2,
            SZ_4M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER2",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER3, L4_PERIPHERAL_L4PER3,
            SZ_8M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4PER3",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4EMU, L4_PERIPHERAL_L4EMU,
            SZ_16M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_L4EMU",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS, L3_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS,
            SZ_1M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_IVAHD_CONFIG, L3_IVAHD_CONFIG,
            SZ_16M, 0, 0, "IPU_IVAHD_CONFIG",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_IVAHD_SL2, L3_IVAHD_SL2,
            SZ_16M, 0, 0, "IPU_IVAHD_SL2",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_DMM, L3_PERIPHERAL_DMM,
            SZ_1M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_DMM",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_OCMC_RAM, L3_OCMC_RAM,
            SZ_4M, 0, 0, "IPU_OCMC_RAM",
        },
     
        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_EMIF_SDRAM, L3_EMIF_SDRAM,
            SZ_256M, 0, 0, "IPU_EMIF_SDRAM",
        },
    };


You can find 3 new TYPE_DEVMEM entries added in above resource table.

-  L3_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS
-  IPU_OCMC_RAM
-  IPU_EMIF_SDRAM

All ELF section placements (as well as the VRINGS, which aren’t in an
ELF section) are placed in memory allocated from the remoteproc CMA area
and are mapped to the virtual address as specified in the TYPE_CARVEOUT
entries.

The virtual addresses #defined are:

.. code-block:: c

    #define IPU_MEM_TEXT            0x0
    #define IPU_MEM_DATA            0x80000000
     
    #define IPU_MEM_IOBUFS          0x90000000
     
    #define IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA        0x9F000000
    #define IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING       0x60000000

The followings are fixed physical address to facilitate a fixed MMU
table.

.. code-block:: c

    #if defined(VAYU_IPU_1)
    #define PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING      0x9D000000
    #elif defined (VAYU_IPU_2)
    #define PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING      0x95800000
    #endif

These PHYS_MEM values match exactly the physical address specified in
the remoteproc CMA area in Linux DTS file:

::

                    ipu2_cma_pool: ipu2_cma@95800000 {
                            compatible = "shared-dma-pool";
                            reg = <0x95800000 0x3800000>;
                            reusable;
                            status = "okay";
                    };
     
                    ipu1_cma_pool: ipu1_cma@9d000000 {
                            compatible = "shared-dma-pool";
                            reg = <0x9d000000 0x2000000>;
                            reusable;
                            status = "okay";
                    };


The 1st entry in the resource table is:

.. code-block:: c

        /* rpmsg vdev entry */
        {
            TYPE_VDEV, VIRTIO_ID_RPMSG, 0,
            RPMSG_IPU_C0_FEATURES, 0, 0, 0, 2, { 0, 0 },
            /* no config data */
        },
        /* the two vrings */
        { IPU_MEM_RPMSG_VRING0, 4096, IPU_RPMSG_VQ0_SIZE, 1, 0 },
        { IPU_MEM_RPMSG_VRING1, 4096, IPU_RPMSG_VQ1_SIZE, 2, 0 },

This tells remoteproc to allocate the vrings and vring buffers, and the
remoteproc CMA area is used for this.

The 2nd-4th entries are:

.. code-block:: c

        {
            TYPE_CARVEOUT,
            IPU_MEM_TEXT, 0,
            IPU_MEM_TEXT_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_TEXT",
        },
        {
            TYPE_CARVEOUT,
            IPU_MEM_DATA, 0,
            IPU_MEM_DATA_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_DATA",
        },
        {
            TYPE_CARVEOUT,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA, 0,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_IPC_DATA",
        },

These carveouts tell remoteproc to allocate memory from its CMA area and
map the allocated physical address to the virtual address specified in
the carveout (the 1st field after TYPE_CARVEOUT), in the IPU’s MMU
(“iommu” in Linux kernel parlance). These are for the ELF sections that
are placed (mapped) in those virtual address.

The TYPE_TRACE entry tells remoteproc where the remote executable’s
trace buffer is, using its C symbol.

The TYPE_DEVMEM entries are virtual <-> physical mappings. remoteproc
just creates an IPU MMU mapping for the entry. The 1st TYPE_DEVMEM entry
corresponds to the vrings and creates the IPU MMU mapping needed to
access them from the IPU core:

.. code-block:: c

        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING, PHYS_MEM_IPC_VRING,
            IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING_SIZE, 0, 0, "IPU_MEM_IPC_VRING",
        },

New TYPE_DEVMEM entry
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To add a new TYPE_DEVMEM entry, for example, to access PRU-ICSS from IPU

-  1. specify the physical address of PRU-ICSS and its virutal address.

::

        #define L3_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS     0x4B200000
        #define IPU_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS    0x6B200000

-  2. increase size of **offset[X]** array in struct my_resource_table.
-  3. add new **struct fw_rsc_devmem devmemY** entry in struct
   my_resource_table.
-  4. increase **number** of entries in ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable.
-  5. add a **offsetof(struct my_resource_table, devmemY)** in
   ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable.
-  6. add actual entry in ti_ipc_remoteproc_ResourceTable.

.. code-block:: c

        {
            TYPE_DEVMEM,
            IPU_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS, L3_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS,
            SZ_1M, 0, 0, "IPU_PERIPHERAL_PRUSS",
        },

Note, when MMU is enabled, even though it is a one-to-one mapping, you
need to have an entry mapped in the MMU for that, e.g. to access
PRU-ICSS from DSP, you must add the following entry in
**rsc_table_vayu_dsp.h**

::

    #define L3_PRU_ICSS             0x4B200000
    #define DSP_PRU_ICSS            0x4B200000

The MMU pagetable can be dumped through debugfs - "cat
/sys/kernel/debug/omap_iommu/<iommu_name>/pagetable"


